---
id: 262
title: JS Basics
date: 2019-12-27T05:23:23+00:00
author: MatthewAisthorpe
excerpt: A quick example using the JS programming language.
layout: post
guid: https://matthewaisthorpe.com.au/?p=262
permalink: /js-basics/
categories:
  - Code
---
We have gone through the [HTML basics](https://matthewaisthorpe.com.au/html-basics/) and [CSS basics](https://matthewaisthorpe.com.au/css-basics/), now for the final part of the trilogy. JS or JavaScript is the final of the three languages every web developer must know.

JavaScript is a dynamic programming language&nbsp;that gives you the power to program the behaviour of web pages and provide&nbsp;dynamic interactivity on websites.

## JS Hello World Example

To show the power of JS we will do a simple hello world example. Create a basic index.html page like below. Like a <link> tag for an external CSS file, you use a <script> tag with a _src_ attribute to include an external JS file. 

<pre class="wp-block-code"><code>&lt;!DOCTYPE html>
&lt;html>
    &lt;head>
    &lt;/head>
    &lt;body>
        &lt;h1>&lt;/h1>
        &lt;script src="js/main.js">&lt;/script>
    &lt;/body>
&lt;/html></code></pre>

In the main.js file

<pre class="wp-block-code"><code>var header = document.querySelector('h1');
header.textContent = 'Hello world!';</code></pre>

When you run the html page you will now see &#8220;Hello World!&#8221; displayed on the page. 

### What just happened?

In our external JS file on line 1 we find the <h1> element on the page using the querySelector function and assign it to a variable called _header_. Similar to how we use CSS selectors. With _header_ declared we then change the textContent property to &#8220;Hello World!&#8221;.

## JS expanded

The Hello World example I ran you through is just a small part of the power of javascript. You can use javascript to trigger actions when a button is clicked, populate content on the web page from another website when it first loads and so much more.